2
Like taking a treasured pet to a taxidermist with disappointing results, the personality and spooky-ooky-ness of The Addams Family has been lost in this new outing directed by Sausage Party’s Greg Tiernan and Conrad Vernon – a mostly unfunny family film with depressingly bland character animation. There are plenty of references here to the earlier incarnations: Charles Addams’ original cartoons for the New Yorker, the 1960s TV series and the two movies from the 1990s. But this uncreepy and decidedly unkooky film is a letdown.

It’s also a waste of a killer voice cast. Charlize Theron is matriarch Morticia Addams (animated with none of the delicious vampire sexiness Anjelica Huston brought to the role). Oscar Issac is her husband Gomez, with Chloë Grace Moretz and Stranger Things’ Finn Wolfhard playing the kids, Wednesday and Pugsley. Home is a former lunatic asylum above a New Jersey town; down the hill, interior decorator and reality TV star Margaux (Allison Janney), a woman with the pep and hairdo of Dolly Parton, is building 50 new houses. When the Addamses refuse to spruce up their eyesore of a gothic pile, Margaux launches a hate campaign against them, mobilising the narrow-minded townspeople.

While their parents go to war, Wednesday and Margaux’s tweenage daughter become friends. As an act of rebellion against her mother, Wednesday, nicely voiced by Moretz with a bored, been-there-killed-that drawl, connects with her inner optimist. (In one of the film’s best scenes, she comes home from the mall wearing a rainbow-coloured unicorn hair clip to Morticia’s horror: “How dare you bring that into my house!”).

Everything is locked and loaded for a heartwarming finale in which outsiders and conservative locals realise that actually they have a lot in common. Without a shred of irony, the film, which is essentially about resisting the pressure to conform or change yourself, has a storyline stitched together from a dozen family films you’ve probably already seen. What’s missing is a heartbeat.

… in the coming year, and the results will define the country for a generation. These are perilous times. Over the last three years, much of what the Guardian holds dear has been threatened – democracy, civility, truth. This US administration is establishing new norms of behaviour. Anger and cruelty disfigure public discourse and lying is commonplace. Truth is being chased away. But with your help we can continue to put it center stage. It will be defining year and we’re asking for your help as we prepare for 2020.

Rampant disinformation, partisan news sources and social media's tsunami of fake news is no basis on which to inform the American public in 2020. The need for a robust, independent press has never been greater, and with your help we can continue to provide fact-based reporting that offers public scrutiny and oversight. We are also committed to keeping our journalism open and accessible to everyone and with your help we can keep it that way.

"America is at a tipping point, finely balanced between truth and lies, hope and hate, civility and nastiness. Many vital aspects of American public life are in play – the Supreme Court, abortion rights, climate policy, wealth inequality, Big Tech and much more. The stakes could hardly be higher. As that choice nears, the Guardian, as it has done for 200 years, and with your continued support, will continue to argue for the values we hold dear – facts, science, diversity, equality and fairness." – US editor, John Mulholland

On the occasion of its 100th birthday in 1921 the editor of the Guardian said, "Perhaps the chief virtue of a newspaper is its independence. It should have a soul of its own." That is more true than ever. Freed from the influence of an owner or shareholders the Guardian's robust independence is our unique driving force and guiding principle.