2
Here’s a defanged, declawed yeti in an animation whose every beat, character and narrative component feels as if it has been algorithmically tested for commercial safety by a computer programme. That even somehow includes the rare moments of unexpected wit assigned to its Gru-ish villain, voiced by Eddie Izzard. The film –and its mythic hero – is a sweet, harmless, giant-kitten ball of white fluff.

The movie is by writer-director DreamWorks veteran Jill Culton, who also directed Open Season and has done animation and story work on Toy Story and Monsters Inc. The setting is a Chinese city, where Yi (voiced by Chloe Bennet) is living with her mother (Michelle Wong) and feisty grandma Nai Nai (Tsai Chin) – and still not over the death of her violinist dad, who had inspired Yi to play the violin. Now she is working many jobs to pay for some much yearned for travel. Then an adorable baby yeti escapes from the research lab owned by the alpinist-turned-corporate-plutocrat Mr Burnish – does that name signal an approximation of The Simpsons’ Mr Burns? – voiced by Izzard. Yi discovers the poor lonely fugitive and conceives a rescue plan to bring this cute yeti home to Mount Everest, with the help of her nerdy cousin Peng (Albert Tsai) and smug yuppie classmate Jin (voiced by Tenzing Norgay Trainor, whose grandfather was Tenzing Norgay, the sherpa who accompanied Sir Edmund Hillary to the summit of Everest in 1953).

There are some borrowings from How to Train Your Dragon and ET, and the yeti has the supernatural power to control the elements, which means that a lot of the ordinary narrative jeopardy is conveniently abolished. The whole idea of the yeti being a mysterious, possibly scary creature semi-visible in the snowy wastes is cancelled by this narrative approach. It’s like finding Nessie hiding in a Scottish pub, a cute little water-creature needing to be brought back to the loch. Did the yeti have to be so bland?

… in the coming year, and the results will define the country for a generation. These are perilous times. Over the last three years, much of what the Guardian holds dear has been threatened – democracy, civility, truth. This US administration is establishing new norms of behaviour. Anger and cruelty disfigure public discourse and lying is commonplace. Truth is being chased away. But with your help we can continue to put it center stage. It will be defining year and we’re asking for your help as we prepare for 2020.

Rampant disinformation, partisan news sources and social media's tsunami of fake news is no basis on which to inform the American public in 2020. The need for a robust, independent press has never been greater, and with your help we can continue to provide fact-based reporting that offers public scrutiny and oversight. We are also committed to keeping our journalism open and accessible to everyone and with your help we can keep it that way.

"America is at a tipping point, finely balanced between truth and lies, hope and hate, civility and nastiness. Many vital aspects of American public life are in play – the Supreme Court, abortion rights, climate policy, wealth inequality, Big Tech and much more. The stakes could hardly be higher. As that choice nears, the Guardian, as it has done for 200 years, and with your continued support, will continue to argue for the values we hold dear – facts, science, diversity, equality and fairness." – US editor, John Mulholland

On the occasion of its 100th birthday in 1921 the editor of the Guardian said, "Perhaps the chief virtue of a newspaper is its independence. It should have a soul of its own." That is more true than ever. Freed from the influence of an owner or shareholders the Guardian's robust independence is our unique driving force and guiding principle.