4
Whatever you think about writer-director Trey Edward Shults, the hot young auteur du jour, you can’t say he doesn’t have chutzpah.

Best known for his claustrophobic horror flick “It Comes at Night” — which critics loved and horror fans kinda didn’t — the 31-year-old Texan is out on a limb again with his third film, “Waves.” As in his 2015 debut, “Krishna,” the story draws on his own life, but this time the white filmmaker has translated his experiences into an intimate portrait of a black family in crisis.

Just a few years ago, this would have been neither remarkable nor controversial. But like it or not, in the wake of #MeToo and #OscarsSoWhite, the question of who gets to tell whose stories is unavoidable.

Shults walks this tightrope with the confidence of an artist who has, as they say, done the work. The story feels organic, authentic, devastating. Instead, it’s the storytelling — including but not limited to the vertigo-inducing visual flourishes — that is sure to turn off a vast swath of the potential audience, even as it delights a slice of the intelligentsia.

Rather than the calibrated three-act narrative arc we’ve been trained to expect, “Waves” is starkly divided into before-and-after stories, each more than an hour, with a different character at the center. The first half belongs to Kelvin Harrison Jr., who starred in “It Comes and Night” and served as unofficial script consultant on “Waves.”

He plays Tyler, a high-school athlete who seems to have everything going for him — a promising career as a college wrestler, a beautiful girlfriend and an active social life, and, oh yeah, a stable, supportive family backing him up — until a bad decision and some bad luck change the trajectory of his life. And not just his.

Shults is sparing with both dialogue and exposition, and the actors — including Sterling K. Brown as a strict father and the ubiquitous Lucas Hedges as a wrestling teammate — are all aiming for the kind of deep naturalism that reveals character one breadcrumb at a time. It’s the old fly-on-the wall verité aesthetic, except that the overcaffeinated fly refuses to stay put.

The eye of camera here is not cool and detached. To the contrary, it’s positively obsessed with Tyler/Harrison, frenetically tracking and panning to keep his face and his physicality in closeup. We are locked in his orbit, sometimes literally circling him, or spinning 360 degrees inside that most intimate of human spaces, the car.

Another trademark Shults flourish is playing with aspect ratio, that is, varying the width of the film’s rectangle, from the standard widescreen look to the boxier proportion of old analog television.

The intent is clearly to immerse the viewer in the character and in the moment, and the theory seems sound enough. But the camera work is so ostentatious that it actually undermines the performances. The actors are trying to fool us into believing we are watching real life — actual human beings at their most raw and fragile — but the director’s fetishistic approach to technique keeps reminding us that we aren’t.

It’s a shame, because “Waves” has plenty of substance if you don’t get too distracted by the style. The characters are fully fleshed individuals, never stereotypes, and that’s key, because although the story doesn’t put race at the center, it doesn’t ignore it, either. Indeed, little moments — such Tyler running in a gray hoodie, in the same state where Trayvon Martin was killed — signal Shults’ thematic intent, which is to excavate the rich, complex humanity underneath a tragic moment that the outside world will see in the all-too familiar shorthand of the police-blotter headline (“18-year-old black man arrested for …”).